<h1>[FT] Donald Trump eases tariffs for allies as he focuses on China</h1>

Donald Trump is easing trade tensions with US allies, bowing to mounting domestic pressure to rein in commercial conflicts across the world and focus on an escalating tariff battle with China.

The US on Friday reached an agreement with Canada and Mexico to remove steel and aluminium tariffs, which had been a persistent source of friction across North America over the past year.

The deal on metals came as Mr Trump decided not to press ahead immediately with levies on EU and Japanese automotive products - despite declaring that foreign car and vehicle imports represented a threat to US national security.

Mr Trump directed Robert Lighthizer, the US trade representative, to launch negotiations with Tokyo, Brussles and other trading partners to "adjust" auto imports into the US, with a deal to be reached within six months.

The combination of moves to limit trade tensions with Canada, Mexico, the EU and Japan capped a tumultuous week in world trade, with global markets shuddering early on at a sharp escalation in the US-China tariff war.

On Wednesday night the economic revalry between Washington and Beijing intensified after Mr Trump placed Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications network manufacturer, on an export blacklist based on national security concerns.

As lawmakers on Capitol Hill, particularly Republicans, grew uneasy about the economic fallout that could result from Mr Trump's protectionist trade moves, the White House was trying to limit some of the damage.

The deal on Canadian and Mexican stell had been long demanded by Congress as a way to smooth the path the ratification of an agreement reached last year to revise Nafta. It finally came through after Justing Trudeau, Canada's prime minister, held repeated calss with Mr Trump in recent days.

The removal of US tariffs - and Canada's retaliatory tariffs - on metals will take effect on Sunday, and no quotas were agreed to replace the levies, as Washington had originally sought. Instead, the countries agreed to create a process to monitor steel and aluminium trade, in order to identify an surges in one direction or the other, which would allow them to reimpose tariffs on certain products.

They also agreed to prevent the shipment of aluminium and steel products made outside of Canada and the US to one another, a measure that appeared directed against China.

"When the US imposed tariffs, we stood up for Canada's economy and our steel and aluminium workers and their families. We immediately retaliated dollar-for-dollar - the strongest relaliation in the world. We stood firm and would not back down until we achieved today's outcome," Mr Trudeau said.

Mexico said the deal - which also lifted its tit-for-tat measures against the US - would benefit both sides. "The tariffs are lifted, remaining with no quotas for steel and aluminium for our country," President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador's office said in a statement.

Both sides would also halt any pending litigation before the World Trade Organization.

Mexico said the two countries would implement measures to prevent the import of aluminium and steel at dumping prices and woulrd set up a process to monitor trade in the metals. But it gave no details of how that would work and experts say it could be easier said than done.

"The devil is in the details ... A system for monitoring is one thing but there is no such thing per se as a mechanism to restrict the re-export of steel that comes into Mexico legally. They would have to put teeth on it," Ken Smith Ramos, who was Mexico's chief negotiator for the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement, told the Financial Times.

Jesus Seade, Mexio's undersecretatry for North America, said both countries were now working together "to create a situation in which we are really partners". He also highlighted what he called the "friendly" tone of Mr Trump's immigration announcements earlier this week in which he made no direct accusations towards Mexico.

Speaking to reporters via video link from Salt Lake City, Mr Seade said he had not been totally anathema to the notion of quotas - Washington's initial demand if tariffs were removed - provided they were "fair, balanced and allowed both industries to work at full capacity".

However, he noted they were unpopular in Mexico, so after exploring the possibility of so-called tariff rate quotas, about 10 days ago, the teams began to discuss the idea of no quotas at all. Agreement was reached three days ago, when Canada was consulted came on board.


"We believe this deal that is so satisfactory for the three countries is a clear signal of the US's willingness to work closely with Mexico and we hope this will have a favourable dynamic for the USMCA," Mr Seade said. 

Congressional Democrates have warned the tariffs had complicated renegotiation of the North American trade deal.

"When it comes to the new agreement, House Demoncrats continue to have a number of substantial concerns related to labour, environment, enforcement and access to affordable meicines provisions. Those issues still need to be remedied," said Richard Neal, chairman of the House of Representatives ways and means committee.

US buisiness groups also welcomed the deal to lift steel and aluminiums tariffs with Canada and Mexico. Tom Donohue, the president of the US Chamber of Commerse, the country's largest business lobby group, said it would bring "immediate relierf to Americn farmers and manufacturers" and a "burst of momentum" for USMCA.

But the reprieve on car tariffs was met with much less enthusiasm.

A big trade showdowm between the US and the EU and Japan could still be in store by the end of the six-month period, since the US will be looking for Brussels and Tokyo to take measures reducing their car imports. Mr Trump did not say what kinkd of measures he was looking for, but quotas could be an option, as could voluntary export restraint.

"We completely reject the notion that our car exports are a national security threat," Cecilia Malmstrom", the EU trade commissioner, wrote on Twitter.

"The EU is prepared to negotiate a limited trade agreement cars, but not WTO-illegal managed trade," she added.

A European Commision spokesperson said Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the EU institution, would discuss trade at the G20 summit in Osaka during a meeting with Mr Trump. "We are convinced that a strong and balanced transatlantic relationship on the basis of reciprocity is a win-win situation for both. Neither the US nor the EU can have an interest to enter a trade conflict," the spokesperson said.

Business, too, was not particularly satisfied on the car tariff front.

The Auto Alliance, which represents carmakers including Volkswagen, BMW, Toyota, Mazda, FOrd and Fiat CHrysler Automobiles, said investment in the sector in the US was at risk.

"Since 2017, domestic and international automakers are investing $22.8bn in new and existing facilities in the US - largely spurred by this administration's pro-graowth policies. However, increased auto tariffs threaten to undo this economic progress. At the end of the day, you can have tariffs or investment, but you can't have both," it said.



